docs: add documentation for Ginkgo-based GHA (#26055)
cilium-team/cilium: Documentation/contributing/testing/ci.rst

.. _ci_jenkins:

CI / Jenkins / GitHub Actions
-----------------------------

The main CI infrastructure is maintained at https://jenkins.cilium.io/ and on
GitHub Actions (GHA).

Triggering Pull-Request Builds
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To ensure that build resources are used judiciously, builds on Jenkins and some
tests on GHA are manually triggered via comments on each pull-request that
contain "trigger-phrases". Only members of the Cilium GitHub organization are
allowed to trigger these jobs. Other GHA are triggered on ``pull_request``

> events, this is specific on each individual GitHub Workflow.

Reviewer: “this is specific on each individual GitHub Workflow” -> What do you mean exactly? That each workflow has its specific trigger?

Side note: There's `pull_request`, and a few actions (not really testing the changes, rather to build the images) with `pull_request_target`. Not sure if worth mentioning them, probably not.

Author: Changed to:
Only members of the Cilium GitHub organization are
allowed to trigger these jobs. Some GitHub Workflows are triggered on
``pull_request`` events and not comment-based. The type of trigger is specific
to each individual GitHub Workflow.

Reviewer: Sounds good, thank you!

| v1.11            | /test-backport-1.11      |
+------------------+--------------------------+

For ``main`` PRs: on top of ``/test``, one may use ``/test-missed-k8s`` to
trigger all non-required K8s versions on Kernel 4.9 as per the `Cilium CI

> matrix`_.

Reviewer: I take it we're removing the trigger?

Author: The `/test-missed-k8s`? Yes

For a full list of GHA, see `GitHub Actions Page <https://github.com/cilium/cilium/actions>`_

There are some Jenkins feature flags based on Pull Requests labels, the list of
labels are the following:

- ``area/containerd``: Enable containerd runtime on all Kubernetes test.
- ``ci/net-next``: Run tests on net-next kernel. This causes the  ``/test``
  target to only run on the net-next kernel. It is purely for testing on a
  different kernel, to merge a PR it must pass the CI without this flag.

Retrigger specific jobs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For all PRs: one may manually retrigger a specific job (e.g. in case of a flake)
with the individual trigger featured directly in the PR check's name (e.g. for
``K8s-1.20-kernel-4.9 (test-1.20-4.9)``, use ``/test-1.20-4.9``).

This works for all displayed Jenkins tests.

On GHA, the same can be achieved via the GitHub web UI, by re-triggering a new
run on the jobs that have failed.

.. image:: /images/gha-retry-1.png
    :align: center

and then

.. image:: /images/gha-retry-2.png

>     :align: center

Reviewer: Your screenshot have a white background, same as the docs; so that it's a bit hard, visually, to understand where the picture starts and stops:

![image](https://github.com/cilium/cilium/assets/17001771/236fcd6f-ab51-44a0-a53e-e9570c2f0e4a)

Would you be able to add a black frame around your screenshots maybe?

Author: Yes I noticed the same thing and thought on the same solution. I wasn't sure if it was the best solution but since you brought it up as well I will do that.

Author: In case you are curious, there's a command for this:
```
convert -bordercolor black -border 10 gha-summary.png gha-summary.png
```

Reviewer: Wow nice, thank you! I've got my next tip-of-the-week <3

Reviewer: They're 10-pixel wide for all pictures, irrespective of the initial resolution, so the final width may vary after the pictures have been rescaled for the HTML docs, though. But doesn't matter, thanks for addressing!

                            //This test should run in each PR for now.

Using GitHub Actions for testing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

On GHA, running a specific set of Ginkgo tests (``conformance-ginkgo.yaml``)
can also be accomplished by modifying the files under
``.github/actions/ginkgo/`` by adding or removing entries.

``main-focus.yaml``:

    This file contains a list of tests to include and exclude. The ``cliFocus``
    defined for each element in the "include" section is expanded to the
    specific defined ``focus``. This mapping allows us to determine which regex

>     should be used with ``ginkgo --focus`` for each element in the "focus" list.

Reviewer: Maybe link to the page for e2e tests, where we describe `ginkgo --focus` with more details?

    Additionally, there is a list of excluded tests along with justifications
    in the form of comments, explaining why each test is excluded based on
    constraints defined in the ginkgo tests.

    For more information, refer to:

>     https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-jobs/using-a-matrix-for-your-jobs#expanding-or-adding-matrix-configurations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For more information, refer to `GitHub's documentation on expanding matrix configurations <https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-jobs/using-a-matrix-for-your-jobs#expanding-or-adding-matrix-configurations>`__
```

Author: Done

    The list of k8s versions under the "k8s-version" section determines the matrix
    of jobs that should be executed for CI when triggered by PRs.

``main-scheduled.yaml``:

    This file specifies the k8s versions to be executed on a regular basis. The
    list of k8s versions under the "k8s-version" section determines the matrix of
    jobs that should be executed for CI as part of scheduled jobs.

Workflow interactions:

    - The ``main-focus.yaml`` file helps define the test focus for CI jobs based on
      specific criteria, expanding the ``cliFocus`` to determine the relevant
      ``focus`` regex for ``ginkgo --focus``.

    - The ``main-k8s-versions.yaml`` file defines the mapping between k8s versions
      and the associated kernel versions to be tested.

    - Both ``main-prs.yaml`` and ``main-scheduled.yaml`` files utilize the
      "k8s-version" section to specify the k8s versions that should be included
      in the job matrix for PRs and scheduled jobs respectively.

    - These files collectively contribute to the generation of the job matrix
      for GitHub Actions workflows, ensuring appropriate testing and validation
      of the defined k8s versions.

> For example, to only run the test under ``f09-datapath-misc-2``, the following

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, to only run the test under ``f09-datapath-misc-2`` with Kubernetes version 1.26, the following
```

Not very clear otherwise why the second file needs to be edited? You do explain below but it would feel more natural to describe what we want to achieve from the start.

Author: Done

files can be modified to have the following content:

``main-focus.yaml``:

   .. code-block:: yaml

        ---
        focus:
        - "f09-datapath-misc-2"
        include:
          - focus: "f09-datapath-misc-2"
            cliFocus: "K8sDatapathConfig Check|K8sDatapathConfig IPv4Only|K8sDatapathConfig High-scale|K8sDatapathConfig Iptables|K8sDatapathConfig IPv4Only|K8sDatapathConfig IPv6|K8sDatapathConfig Transparent"

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

I'm not a fan of double blank lines (here and elsewhere), but don't mind too much.

Author: Oh I thought we need them with code-blocks

Reviewer: No I don't think so

``main-prs.yaml``:

   .. code-block:: yaml

        ---
        k8s-version:
          - "1.26"

> The ``main-k8s-versions.yaml`` and ``main-scheduled.yaml`` can files be left

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``main-k8s-versions.yaml`` and ``main-scheduled.yaml`` files can be left
```

Author: Done

that need to be modified for the ``conformance-ginkgo.yaml`` can be found in
form of comments inside that file under the ``on`` section and enable the
event type of ``pull_request``. Additionally, the following section also needs
to be modified:

   .. code-block:: yaml

        jobs:
          check_changes:
            name: Deduce required tests from code changes
            [...]
            outputs:
              tested: ${{ steps.tested-tree.outputs.src }}
              matrix_sha: ${{ steps.sha.outputs.sha }}
              base_branch: ${{ steps.sha.outputs.base_branch }}
              sha: ${{ steps.sha.outputs.sha }}
              #
              # For bisect uncomment the base_branch and 'sha' lines below and comment
              # the two lines above this comment
              #
              #base_branch: <replace with the base branch name, should be 'main', not your branch name>
              #sha: <replace with the SHA of an existing docker image tag that you want to bisect>

By following the instructions, the ``base_branch`` needs be uncommented out and
pointed to the base branch name we are testing; the ``sha`` field needs to

> point to a commit SHA that we want to bisect. **The SHA needs to point to an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As per the instructions, the ``base_branch`` needs to be uncommented and
should point to the base branch name that we are testing. The ``sha`` must to
point to the commit SHA that we want to bisect. **The SHA must point to an
```

Alternately, I think Sarah's recommendations are to use second person and imperative: “... uncomment the ``base_branch`` and make it point to ...”. Although we'd probably need to rework all the file to have something consistent.

Author: Fixed

existing image tag under the ``quay.io/cilium/cilium-ci`` docker image
repository**.

> It is possible to find out if a SHA does not exist or if it exists by running

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is possible to find out whether or not a SHA exists by running
```

Author: Fixed

        $ docker manifest inspect quay.io/cilium/cilium-ci:22fa4bbd9a03db162f08c74c6ef260c015ecf25e
        ERROR: quay.io/cilium/cilium-ci:22fa4bbd9a03db162f08c74c6ef260c015ecf25e: not found

        $ docker buildx imagetools inspect quay.io/cilium/cilium-ci:7b368923823e63c9824ea2b5ee4dc026bc4d5cd8
        Name:      quay.io/cilium/cilium-ci:7b368923823e63c9824ea2b5ee4dc026bc4d5cd8
        MediaType: application/vnd.docker.distribution.manifest.list.v2+json
        Digest:    sha256:0b7d1078570e6979c3a3b98896e4a3811bff483834771abc5969660df38463b5

        Manifests:
          Name:      quay.io/cilium/cilium-ci:7b368923823e63c9824ea2b5ee4dc026bc4d5cd8@sha256:63dbffea393df2c4cc96ff340280e92d2191b6961912f70ff3b44a0dd2b73c74
          MediaType: application/vnd.docker.distribution.manifest.v2+json
          Platform:  linux/amd64

          Name:      quay.io/cilium/cilium-ci:7b368923823e63c9824ea2b5ee4dc026bc4d5cd8@sha256:0c310ab0b7a14437abb5df46d62188f4b8b809f0a2091899b8151e5c0c578d09
          MediaType: application/vnd.docker.distribution.manifest.v2+json
          Platform:  linux/arm64

Once the changes are performed and pushed into a draft Pull Request, it will

> possible to visualize the test results in the Pull Request.

Reviewer: A Pull Request itself contains no tests?

```suggestion
Once the changes are committed and pushed into a draft Pull Request, it is
possible to visualize the test results on the Pull Request's page.
```

Author: I understood your suggestion but I didn't understand your question :thinking:

Reviewer: I was referring to “the test results in the Pull Request”. I understand the meaning, but strictly speaking, I see a Pull Request as a set of changes we request maintainers to pull. Changes don't _contain_ CI tests, so I thought it strange to mention tests results _in_ the Pull Request (I see them more _attached to_ a Pull Request).

Anyway. Just me being picky.

GitHub Test Results
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Once the test finishes, its result is sent to the respective pull request.

Reviewer: Consistency on case

```suggestion
Once the test finishes, its result is sent to the respective Pull Request's summary.
```

or “...'s page” to avoid confusion with the other “summary” page mentioned just below.

Author: Fixed

In case of a failure, it is possible to check with test failed by going over the

> summary page of the test failure:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"Summary" page of the test failure:
```

Could we have a screenshot to help find that page, please?

Author: I thought about it but it is tricky because it depends how you are executing the tests. I've re-written like this:
```
In case of a failure, it is possible to check with test failed by going over the
summary of the test on the GitHub Workflow Run's page
```
WDYT?

Reviewer: OK I didn't know that. Yes, sounds good to me :+1:.

.. image:: /images/gha-summary.png
    :align: center

On this example, the test ``K8sDatapathConfig Transparent encryption DirectRouting Check connectivity with transparent encryption and direct routing with bpf_host``
failed. With the ``cilium-sysdumps`` artifact available for download we can
retrieve them and perform further inspection to identify the reason for the

> failure.

Reviewer: `retrieve them` -> what is “them”?

```suggestion
retrieve them and perform further inspection to identify the cause for the
failure.
```

Author: > retrieve them -> what is “them”?

The `cilium-sysdumps` which is only ONE artifact named `cilium-sysdumpS` :smile: 

Fixed

> failure.

Reviewer: Can we link to the `ci-failure-triage` section here, so that readers can check what to do on failure?

Author: Fixed
